doc/Objeq-Reference.md, before:

# objeq Grammar Reference Manual
This document serves as a quick introduction to the objeq Query Grammar.

## Glossary
Before diving in deep, we should define some of the terms that will be used throughout this section:

### Source Set
An array used as the source of queried data.  As Queries may be chained, a Result Set may also serve as a Source Set.

### Working Set
The Working Set is a set of Items based on the original Source Set.  It is a temporary container, and at any point in time may be in various states of sorting or refinement.

### Result Set
An array that is the result of queried data.  While not strictly *read-only*, a Result Set that is produced by dynamic Queries will be overwritten if any of the Query's Source Set data or Parameters change.

## Query
A Query consists of a set of steps.  Each step of a Query will yield an intermediate Result Set that will become the Source Set for the next Query Step.  In this way, you can expand or refine the results of your query as necessary.  For example:

    where lastName == 'Beck' expand addresses then where country == 'Germany'

Which could have also been written as:

    lastName == 'Beck' <: addresses | country == 'Germany'

This is a Query that consists of two Query Steps.

1) The first Step filters the Source Set to only those Items whose lastName property matches the String 'Beck'.  It then produces an intermediate Result Set consisting of the elements stored by the addresses property.

2) The second Step processes the intermediate Result Set and filters those Items by a country property, resulting in a Result Set that must match the String 'Germany'.

## Query Step
A Query Step consists of one of four refinements.  The first is a Predicate that is used to filter your Source Set, the second is a Selector for drilling into the filtered results, the third is a Collator for ordering the results, and the fourth is an Aggregator for processing the Working Set into a single result.  The basic grammar for a Query is as follows:

    Query
      : LeadingStep (TrailingStep)*
      ;

    LeadingStep
      : WHERE? Predicate
      | Selector
      | Collator
      | Aggregator
      ;

    TrailingStep
      : (THEN | WHERE) Predicate
      | THEN? Selector
      | THEN? Collator
      | THEN? Aggregator
      ;

The order of the Steps is important because it determines the composition of the Working Set as it's being passed between the Steps.

For example, the following are *entirely* different Queries:

    where firstName == 'William' order by lastName select spouse

    where firstName == 'William' select spouse order by lastName

For brevity and to visually isolate the filter conditions, these two Queries could have also been written:

    firstName == 'William' by lastName -> spouse

    firstName == 'William' -> spouse by lastName

The first Query selects all Objects that have a firstName Property equal to 'William', orders those by the lastName Property of the same Object, and then returns the spouse Property of that Object.

The second Query selects all Objects that have a firstName Property equal to 'William', returns the spouse Property for each of those Objects, sorting them by the spouse's lastName Property.

These two Queries would only work identically if spouses have the same last name, but we know that in the real world this isn't always the case.

### Predicate
The Predicate starts with the keyword `where`, but this is purely optional and is meant solely for readability and to avoid ambiguity.  The `where` keyword is followed by a set of richly expressed conditions used to determine which Items from the Source Set will be returned as part of the Result Set

For the most part, the syntax for these conditions is the same as JavaScript's, expression syntax, but with some differences both in grammar and behavior.

#### Keywords
The keywords `and`, `or` and `not` may be used instead of `&&`, `||` and `!` respectively, so the following Queries are equivalent.

    where firstName == 'William' and lastName == 'Beck'
    firstName == 'William' && lastName == 'Beck'

As are these:

    where firstName == 'William' and not happy
    firstName == 'William' && !happy

#### The IN Operator
objeq supports an operator called `IN` which will return true if the left operand exists as an element of the right operand.  Presently only the searching of Arrays is supported.  The following predicate returns all Objects with a pet Property belonging to the specified set of animals.

    where pet in [ 'dog', 'cat', 'pig', 'goat', 'donkey' ]

#### Regular Expressions
objeq supports Regular Expression matching using the Ruby `=~` operator, where the left operand is a regular expression and the right operand is a string to be matched.  Unlike the Ruby operator, objeq's Regular Expression matching only returns a true or false result.  The following predicate returns all unhappy Objects that have a firstName Property beginning with the letter 'W'.

    "^W" =~ firstName && !happy

### Selector
After a Predicate is processed, the Working Set will consist of a subset of the original Source Set.  The Selector is used to evaluate these Items and return derived content as the Result Set.  Selectors most often will be used to return Child Properties, but can also be used to generate new Objects and Arrays

There are three types of Selectors:

#### General Purpose Selector
General purposes Selectors will evaluate *as-is*, such that there is one resulting Item for every input Item in the Working Set.  This will be the case even if the evaluation yields a `null` value.

The following Query finds all Objects with a lastName Property of 'Beck' and returns only the firstName Properties from those Objects.

    where lastName == 'Beck' select firstName

This Query is similar, but generates new Objects as its Result Set:

    lastName == 'Beck' select { fullName: firstName + ' ' + lastName }

This Query generates new Objects as its Result Set using a shorthand for directly copying fields:

    lastName == 'Beck' -> { firstName, lastName }

#### 'Expand' Selector
Unlike the General Purpose Selector, the 'Contract' and 'Expand' Selectors may not yield a one-to-one mapping between the Working Set and Result Set.

The 'Expand' Selector is used to drill into an Array and return all of its elements, if there are any, contributing them individually to the final Result Set:

    lastName == 'Beck' expand addresses

You can also use the shorthand:

    lastName == 'Beck' <: addresses

In this case, each individual element of addresses will be added to the Result Set.  If addresses is not an Array, it will be returned *as-is*, but only if it's not null.

#### 'Contract' Selector
The 'Contract' Selector is used to drill into an Array, either returning its first element, if there is one, or contributing nothing to the Result Set:

    lastName == 'Beck' contract addresses

You can also use the shorthand:

    lastName == 'Beck' :> addresses

One might think that this is semantically the same as the following:

    lastName == 'Beck' select addresses[0]

But the former query will return no Items in the Result Set if there are no elements in the addresses array.  On the other hand, the latter query will return a null in the Result Set.  If addresses is not an Array, it will be returned *as-is*, but only if it's not null.

### Collator
A Collator is used to sort the Working Set based on a list of provided sort criteria.  A Collator must be placed after a Predicate and can appear before or after a Selector.  The order of the Collator and Selector is important because it determines whether or not the sorting is executed against the Selector results.

This Query sorts the results by the lastName Property in Ascending Order followed by the firstName property in Descending Order, returning a generated set of Arrays as the Result Set.

    order by lastName, firstName desc -> [ lastName + ', ' + firstName ]

### Aggregator
In theory, an Aggregator yields a single Item Result Set based on the Items in the Working Set.  We say 'in theory' because there is no strict requirement that the result be a single Item.  The Aggregator consists of a set of functions that are registered as objeq Library Extensions.

As an example, this will register an Extension called 'avg' for calculating average values:

    junqi.registerExtension('avg', function _avg(ctx, value) {
      if ( Array.isArray(value) ) {
        if ( value.length === 0 ) return 0;
        for ( var i = 0, r = 0, l = value.length; i < l; r += value[i++] );
        return r / l;
      }
      return typeof value === 'number' ? value : NaN;
    });

This can then be use in the following way:

    age > 20 select age aggregate avg

Which filters by all Items with an age property over 20, selects the age property into the Working Set and then returns the average of all the values in the Working Set.  This could have also been written:

    age > 20 -> age := avg

What if the ages average out to a really long fractional part?  You can chain that result into a secondary function, like so:

    age > 20 -> age := avg, round

This will calculate the average and then round it.

By default, there are no Aggregator Extensions registered, but you can find several examples in extensions/extensions.js.

Commit message:

removed the CONTRACT operator.  It was silly

doc/Objeq-Reference.md, after:

# objeq Grammar Reference Manual
This document serves as a quick introduction to the objeq Query Grammar.

## Glossary
Before diving in deep, we should define some of the terms that will be used throughout this section:

### Source Set
An array used as the source of queried data.  As Queries may be chained, a Result Set may also serve as a Source Set.

### Working Set
The Working Set is a set of Items based on the original Source Set.  It is a temporary container, and at any point in time may be in various states of sorting or refinement.

### Result Set
An array that is the result of queried data.  While not strictly *read-only*, a Result Set that is produced by dynamic Queries will be overwritten if any of the Query's Source Set data or Parameters change.

## Query
A Query consists of a set of steps.  Each step of a Query will yield an intermediate Result Set that will become the Source Set for the next Query Step.  In this way, you can expand or refine the results of your query as necessary.  For example:

    where lastName == 'Beck' expand addresses then where country == 'Germany'

Which could have also been written as:

    lastName == 'Beck' <: addresses | country == 'Germany'

This is a Query that consists of two Query Steps.

1) The first Step filters the Source Set to only those Items whose lastName property matches the String 'Beck'.  It then produces an intermediate Result Set consisting of the elements stored by the addresses property.

2) The second Step processes the intermediate Result Set and filters those Items by a country property, resulting in a Result Set that must match the String 'Germany'.

## Query Step
A Query Step consists of one of four refinements.  The first is a Predicate that is used to filter your Source Set, the second is a Selector for drilling into the filtered results, the third is a Collator for ordering the results, and the fourth is an Aggregator for processing the Working Set into a single result.  The basic grammar for a Query is as follows:

    Query
      : LeadingStep (TrailingStep)*
      ;

    LeadingStep
      : WHERE? Predicate
      | Selector
      | Collator
      | Aggregator
      ;

    TrailingStep
      : (THEN | WHERE) Predicate
      | THEN? Selector
      | THEN? Collator
      | THEN? Aggregator
      ;

The order of the Steps is important because it determines the composition of the Working Set as it's being passed between the Steps.

For example, the following are *entirely* different Queries:

    where firstName == 'William' order by lastName select spouse

    where firstName == 'William' select spouse order by lastName

For brevity and to visually isolate the filter conditions, these two Queries could have also been written:

    firstName == 'William' by lastName -> spouse

    firstName == 'William' -> spouse by lastName

The first Query selects all Objects that have a firstName Property equal to 'William', orders those by the lastName Property of the same Object, and then returns the spouse Property of that Object.

The second Query selects all Objects that have a firstName Property equal to 'William', returns the spouse Property for each of those Objects, sorting them by the spouse's lastName Property.

These two Queries would only work identically if spouses have the same last name, but we know that in the real world this isn't always the case.

### Predicate
The Predicate starts with the keyword `where`, but this is purely optional and is meant solely for readability and to avoid ambiguity.  The `where` keyword is followed by a set of richly expressed conditions used to determine which Items from the Source Set will be returned as part of the Result Set

For the most part, the syntax for these conditions is the same as JavaScript's, expression syntax, but with some differences both in grammar and behavior.

#### Keywords
The keywords `and`, `or` and `not` may be used instead of `&&`, `||` and `!` respectively, so the following Queries are equivalent.

    where firstName == 'William' and lastName == 'Beck'
    firstName == 'William' && lastName == 'Beck'

As are these:

    where firstName == 'William' and not happy
    firstName == 'William' && !happy

#### The IN Operator
objeq supports an operator called `IN` which will return true if the left operand exists as an element of the right operand.  Presently only the searching of Arrays is supported.  The following predicate returns all Objects with a pet Property belonging to the specified set of animals.

    where pet in [ 'dog', 'cat', 'pig', 'goat', 'donkey' ]

#### Regular Expressions
objeq supports Regular Expression matching using the Ruby `=~` operator, where the left operand is a regular expression and the right operand is a string to be matched.  Unlike the Ruby operator, objeq's Regular Expression matching only returns a true or false result.  The following predicate returns all unhappy Objects that have a firstName Property beginning with the letter 'W'.

    "^W" =~ firstName && !happy

### Selector
After a Predicate is processed, the Working Set will consist of a subset of the original Source Set.  The Selector is used to evaluate these Items and return derived content as the Result Set.  Selectors most often will be used to return Child Properties, but can also be used to generate new Objects and Arrays

There are three types of Selectors:

#### General Purpose Selector
General purposes Selectors will evaluate *as-is*, such that there is one resulting Item for every input Item in the Working Set.  This will be the case even if the evaluation yields a `null` value.

The following Query finds all Objects with a lastName Property of 'Beck' and returns only the firstName Properties from those Objects.

    where lastName == 'Beck' select firstName

This Query is similar, but generates new Objects as its Result Set:

    lastName == 'Beck' select { fullName: firstName + ' ' + lastName }

This Query generates new Objects as its Result Set using a shorthand for directly copying fields:

    lastName == 'Beck' -> { firstName, lastName }

#### 'Expand' Selector
Unlike the General Purpose Selector, the 'Contract' and 'Expand' Selectors may not yield a one-to-one mapping between the Working Set and Result Set.

The 'Expand' Selector is used to drill into an Array and return all of its elements, if there are any, contributing them individually to the final Result Set:

    lastName == 'Beck' expand addresses

You can also use the shorthand:

    lastName == 'Beck' <: addresses

In this case, each individual element of addresses will be added to the Result Set.  If addresses is not an Array, it will be returned *as-is*, but only if it's not null.  Another example:

    lastName == 'Beck' <: phoneNumber

One might think that this is semantically the same as the following:

    lastName == 'Beck' select phoneNumber

But the former query will return no Items in the Result Set if there are is no associated phoneNumber.  On the other hand, the latter query will return a null in the Result Set.  If you wanted to rewrite the second query to function like the first, it would be:

    lastName == 'Beck' and phoneNumber select phoneNumber

### Collator
A Collator is used to sort the Working Set based on a list of provided sort criteria.  A Collator must be placed after a Predicate and can appear before or after a Selector.  The order of the Collator and Selector is important because it determines whether or not the sorting is executed against the Selector results.

This Query sorts the results by the lastName Property in Ascending Order followed by the firstName property in Descending Order, returning a generated set of Arrays as the Result Set.

    order by lastName, firstName desc -> [ lastName + ', ' + firstName ]

### Aggregator
In theory, an Aggregator yields a single Item Result Set based on the Items in the Working Set.  We say 'in theory' because there is no strict requirement that the result be a single Item.  The Aggregator consists of a set of functions that are registered as objeq Library Extensions.

As an example, this will register an Extension called 'avg' for calculating average values:

    junqi.registerExtension('avg', function _avg(ctx, value) {
      if ( Array.isArray(value) ) {
        if ( value.length === 0 ) return 0;
        for ( var i = 0, r = 0, l = value.length; i < l; r += value[i++] );
        return r / l;
      }
      return typeof value === 'number' ? value : NaN;
    });

This can then be use in the following way:

    age > 20 select age aggregate avg

Which filters by all Items with an age property over 20, selects the age property into the Working Set and then returns the average of all the values in the Working Set.  This could have also been written:

    age > 20 -> age := avg

What if the ages average out to a really long fractional part?  You can chain that result into a secondary function, like so:

    age > 20 -> age := avg, round

This will calculate the average and then round it.

By default, there are no Aggregator Extensions registered, but you can find several examples in extensions/extensions.js.
